How Tali Forth handles loops and branches
Scot W. Stevenson <scot.stevenson@gmail.com>
First version: 30. Jan 2015
This version: 23. Feb 2015

This document gives the background on how Tali Forth as a STC Forth variant
handles loops (DO/?DO/LEAVE/LOOP/+LOOP) and branches (IF/ELSE/THEN). It is
based on a discussion at http://forum.6502.org/viewtopic.php?f=9&t=3176 , see
there for more details. Another take on this subject that handles things a bit
differently is at
http://blogs.msdn.com/b/ashleyf/archive/2011/02/06/loopty-do-i-loop.aspx


BRANCHES

Branches are easiest to understand at first, so we start with them. 

For IF-THEN, we need to compile something called a "conditional forward
branch", traditionally called 0BRANCH. Then, at run-time, if the value on the
Data Stack is false (flag is zero), the branch is taken ("branch on zero",
therefore the name). Execpt that we don't have the target of that branch yet --
it will later be added by THEN. For this to work, we remember the address after
the 0BRANCH instruction during the compilation of IF. This is put on the Data
Stack, so that THEN knows where to compile it's address in the second step.
Until then, a dummy value is compiled after 0BRANCH to reserve the space we
need. 

In Forth, this can be realized by

: IF  POSTPONE 0BRANCH HERE 0 , ; IMMEDIATE

and 

: THEN  HERE SWAP ! ; IMMEDIATE

though Tali Forth uses as much assembler as possible. Note THEN doesn't
actually compile anything at the location in memory where it is at. It's job is
simply to help IF out of the mess it created. 

If we have an ELSE, we have to add an unconditional BRANCH and manipulate the
address that IF left on the Data Stack. The Forth for this is: 

: ELSE  POSTPONE BRANCH HERE 0 , HERE ROT ! ; IMMEDIATE

THEN has no idea what has just happened, and just like before compiles its
address where the value on the top of the Data Stack told it to -- except that
this value now comes from ELSE, not IF. 



LOOPS 

Loops are far more complicated, because we have DO ?DO LOOP +LOOP UNLOOP and
LEAVE to take care of. These can call up to three addresses: One for the normal
looping action (LOOP/+LOOP), one to skip over the loop at the beginning (?DO)
and one to skip out of the loop (LEAVE). 

Based on a suggestion by Garth Wilson, we begin each loop in run-time by saving
the address after the whole loop construct to the Return Stack. That way, LEAVE
and ?DO know where to jump to when called, and we don't interfere with any
IF/THEN structures. On top of that address, we place the limit and start values
for the loop. 

The key to staying sane while designing these constructs is to first make
a list of what we want to happen at compile-time and what at run-time. Let's
start with a simple DO/LOOP.


DO AT COMPILE-TIME: 
- Remember current address (in other words, HERE) on the Return Stack (!) so 
  we can later compile the code for the post-loop address to the Return Stack
- Compile some dummy values to reserve the space for said code
- Compile the run-time code; we'll call that fragment (DO)
- Push the current address (the new HERE) to the Data Stack so LOOP knows where 
  the loop contents begin

DO AT RUN-TIME: 
- Take limit and start off Data Stack and push them to the Return Stack

Since LOOP is just a special case of +LOOP with an index of one, we can get
away with considering them at the same time. 


LOOP AT COMPILE TIME: 
- Compile the run-time part (+LOOP)
- Consume the address that is on top of the Data Stack as the jump target for 
  normal looping and compile it
- Compile UNLOOP for when we're done with the loop, getting rid of the 
  limit/start and post-loop addresses on the Return Stack 
- Get the address on the top of the Return Stack which points to the dummy
  code compiled by DO
- At that address, compile the code that pushes the address after the list
  construct to the Return Stack at run-time

LOOP AT RUN-TIME (which is (+LOOP)) 
- Add loop step to count
- Loop again if we haven't crossed the limit, otherwise continue after loop

At one glance, we can see that the complicated stuff happens at compile-time.
This is good, because we only have to do that once for each loop. 

In Tali Forth, these routines are coded in assembler. With this setup, UNLOOP
becomes simple (six PLAs -- four for the limit/count of DO, two for the address
pushed to the stack just before it) and LEAVE even simpler (four PLAs for the
address). 
